In this video we'll learn about what functions are in C++.
When we develop C++ programs we typically use the predefined functions in classes in the C plus plus
standard libraries.
These are functions and classes that have already been written for us and tested and they're available
for us to use.
We've already seen how useful the standard vector and standard string classes can be.
C++ has many other libraries that we can use in the same way depending on our application.
We may also use third party functions in libraries.
These may be open source commercial or other types of libraries that have been developed by other programmers
and are available to use in our applications.
So if we want to develop games in C++ we'd very likely use third party libraries or frameworks such
as Cocoa's to DX unreal springe cry engine or others.
What would we use third party libraries.
Well that's pretty easy because these libraries take a tremendous amount of effort to develop.
And chances are high that the functionality you need has already been implemented and tested and ready
to use.
So why reinvent the wheel.
Reusing existing functions in classes from existing libraries is great but even then you still need
to write your own C++ functions in classes that are specific to the problem you're trying to solve.
What talk about classes and object oriented programming soon.
In this section we'll focus on functions functions allow us to modularize our program.
This is a big deal since we can divide our program into logical self-contained units of code that we
can reuse whenever we need to.
Let's see a simple example.
On the left hand side of the screen you can see a program written in the way we've been writing them
up to this point.
Lots of statements one after the other.
Some of these statements might be if statement so might be looping statements but you can see that this
program has three logical sections one for input one for processing and one for output.
But everything in the main function.
This is OK for relatively small programs like the ones we've written but his programs get larger more
complex.
This breaks down quickly and the code becomes difficult to manage.
Also we tend to copy and paste code a lot since we may need the same functionality in different places
in the program.
There's a field in computer science called Software Engineering suffer engineering is all about designing
your solutions and writing your code in a way that can be easily understood debugged and extended.
One of the fundamental principles in software engineering is abstraction.
Abstraction is exactly what functions help us achieve.
Let's look at the example on the right side of the screen.
In this case we've replaced 10 statements with three.
These three statements are function calls.
Now when we look at our main function we see less detail more abstraction.
We can now see read input process input and provide output.
So we've modularized our program.
We know that we still have to execute all the code we had before but we've removed it from Maine and
replaced it with a call to functions in each case.
Let's see what these functions look like.
On the left side of the screen we see the same main function with the three function calls and on the
right side of the screen we see the implemented functions read input process input and provide output.
Notice that each of these functions executes the same statements that we were executing previously in
the main function.
This makes our code more modular more readable more maintainable easily dwell and easier to reuse.
Let's see how this can help us develop programs.
A common analogy that's used when learning about functions is the boss worker analogy.
Let's assume you're the boss and you need to get a task done.
This task involves several subtasks and your job is not to perform the individual subtasks but to coordinate
the execution of those subtasks and report the synthesized results back to your own boss.
So you've hired three workers that have expertise in each of those subtasks.
So you assign a subtasks each worker and provide each of them whatever information they need to perform
it.
Since each of the workers knows exactly what to do when they complete their subtask they report their
results back to you.
This may simply be a comment that says I'm done or could be a complex report that they created and provide
to you.
Now that all said tests are complete and you look at the individual results synthesize a report and
get to your boss.
Sounds like an easy job being a boss right.
Actually no the boss needs to know what worker to assign the specific subtask to the order to do them
in the information to provide to each of them so they can do their job and the boss needs to know what
he or she is getting back in order to synthesize it and report back.
This is a great analogy to using functions if you need to call functions you write your code to the
function specification.
You need to understand what the function does.
You need to understand what information the function needs.
You need to understand what the function returns to you.
You need to understand any errors that the function may produce and why you need to understand the performance
constraints and so on what you don't need to worry about is how the function works internally.
Unless of course you the programmer coding the function.
This is super important to understand when we use string vectors math functions complex image processing
libraries collision detection and games.
We don't need to know how those algorithms work.
This concept is called information hiding and we revisit this again when we talk about object oriented
classes.
Let's see an example of this.
C++ has many libraries one library is a mathematics library in order to use this library we must include
sci math the math library has many mathematical functions including trig exponential logarithmic power
rounding and many more kinds of functions.
These functions are global functions which means they are available to the entire program.
We call these functions by using their name followed by a series of arguments in the output statement
on this slide we're calling square root and we're passing in four hundred point zero to it.
The square root function will calculate the square root of 400 and we turn the result which is printin
in the last example we're calling the power power function which expects two arguments in this case
we're calculating 2.0 raised to the 3.0 power.
Notice that to use these functions we need to know is what they do their name what they expect from
us and what they return to us how the square root or the power is being calculated.
Isn't something I need to know to use them.
That's classic abstraction.
There are many built in functions and classes and C++.
However we need to learn to design and write our own.
In this section we'll learn to write our own functions.
Here's a preview of a very simple function so you can see where we're going.
Don't worry about the syntax.
I'll cover all that later.
In this case I have a function called add numbers and it expects to integers named A and B.
The body of the function simply returns a plus b.
So we take the sum of a post B and return the result to the caller.
Notice the event to the left of the function name that tells you what the function returns.
In this case an integer.
Pretty easy right now every time we need to add to integers we can call add numbers and supply the two
arguments that the function expects.
Then I can do whatever I want with the result I get back.
In this case I'm displaying it.
I know what you're probably thinking why in the world would I write a function that adds two numbers
when I can just use the plus operator.
Well normally you wouldn't.
But suppose we had a requirement that if any of those numbers is negative then we must return 0.
Let's see how we can modify this function so this is what the function might look like if we had to
return 0 if either A or B is negative.
It would probably be a good idea to give this function a better name but hopefully this preview example
gives you a good high level view of a simple user defined function.
Let's head over to the ID and use some of the functions in the C plus plus standard library before we
learned to write and define our own functions.
It's important to understand to use functions that are already defined for us.
I've opened up a browser and I've gone to see Peepy reference dot com.
I'm going to show you three pages within this Web site and I'll provide you are Elle's and the resources
for the course here I'm going to the C++ standard library header files here all the standard header
files in C++ and you can see there's a whole bunch of them.
This would become your next learning experience in C++.
Once you understand the basics of the programming language once you understand object orientation within
C++ then it's a matter of learning what's out there and available to you.
There's a lot of stuff out there and there's a lot to learn.
But don't worry you won't learn it all at once you'll learn it little by little as you use C++.
What I want to do here is I want to talk about a couple of libraries and we'll run a couple of example
programs using those libraries will use some of the functions in those libraries.
The first library will use the math library and I've got a pane open right here to the C math standard
library Hetter.
Now we're going to use some of the functions in here.
You can see that there's they're all defined and if you need information about any of them you can just
click on here and you can learn about them.
We're going to use the square root the cube root the power function there just like what you would think
right use pass in a number you get the square root.
You pass it a number you get the cube root.
And in this case I pass in two numbers to the power function and it will raise the base to some exponent.
And here's a whole bunch of information about those functions.
OK.
We're also going to do sign and cosign and a couple of other interesting and very useful functions.
The ceiling the floor and round the ceiling of a floating point number is the next integer.
So if my number is twelve point four the ceiling would be 13.
The floor is the other way around.
So if I have twelve point four then the four would be 12.
And rounding works just like you would expect twelve point five rounds up to 13 twelve point four rounds
down to 12.
So that's what we'll do.
And then in the next little program All right we'll come to the C standard library and I'll open up
that web site for you as well.
This is C standard lib.
That's the name of the library Hetter that's what you need to include.
And here's a couple of functions in here that we'll use and I'll scroll down just a little bit there
right here.
It's Rand and Rand Rand generates a random number a pseudo random number and I'll explain what that
means in a little bit.
And as Rand sees in the random number generator what we'll do is we'll use this function rand to generate
the number.
Let's say we're rolling a six sided die and we can get something between 1 and 6.
We could really make that between anything and anything and I'll show you how to do that and then we'll
see that random number generators so that the patterns of numbers we get will differ every time.
So I'm going to head over to the I-T now and we'll start with the math functions.
Ok so I'm back in the idea and I'm in the section 11 workspace in the math project and here we're just
doing some real simple math examples to show you how to use these functions.
First of all we're including C math that's required otherwise you're going to get a lot of compiler
errors because the compiler won't know about square root of one about sign or anything else in this
little example.
I'm declaring a double called name and I'm asking the user to enter that number.
Once the user enters the number I'm simply calling the square root function that will return the square
root of the number and will display it right in line.
The cube root the sign to cosign the ceiling the floor and we'll round that number.
Then after that I'll ask the user for another number which I've defined called power.
In this case we'll raise that number that they typed into this power so if they typed in 2.5 we'll raise
it to whatever power they want to take.
And again here what we're doing is we're calling the power function right here and we're passing in
the number and the power to raise it to.
Pretty simple.
You can see from this code I don't know how square root works or cube root works or sign or cosign or
power.
I don't know how this stuff is implemented.
Behind the scenes that's the whole point.
I don't care I don't need to know.
And this is where abstraction really shines because we're just trying to solve a problem and I know
I need to raise something with power.
I know I need a sign or cosign.
I can simply look up the library understand how that function is being called understand what that function
returns.
And then just use it and use the result.
So let's run this program and let's say the number we enter is one twenty five point six and I center.
So the square root of twenty five point six is eleven point twenty seventy one.
The cube root we expect to be right around five is five times five is twenty five times five is 125.
So that gives us it's not a formal test case but it's a pretty informal test case that makes us feel
good that our code is working.
Here's the sign of the number the cosigned of the number now the ceiling of one twenty five point six
is the next integer up which is 126.
The floor would be the integer down which is 125.
And in this case we round one twenty five point six.
Up to 126.
So let's enter a power let's raise this to the 4.2 power you go that's a pretty big number.
So one twenty five point six raise to the four point two power is six point five four to six nine times
ten to the eighth.
There you go.
We've used the math functions without knowing anything about how they're implemented.
That's a real real powerful place to be.
Let me go back to the idea now and we'll create some random numbers.
OK so I'm back in the ID and I'm still in the section 11 workspace.
This time I'm in the random project.
Now in order to use random numbers I'm using the rand function or the rand function has been used a
long time and c plus plus and in C as well.
But there's a better way to create random numbers if you're really doing statistical processing and
that's the random header file.
I'm not going to cover that.
I'm just going to use rand since that's what we're learning about.
Calling functions but if you really need very precise distributions consider using the random header
file.
Ok so in this case we're including the C standard library that gives us the rand function and we're
also including the C time library.
I'll talk about that in a minute.
In order to use random numbers we really need to seed a random number generator.
Now what's a random number generator a random number generator is just a generator that creates random
numbers.
Computers are real bad with random numbers.
We have what are called pseudo random numbers.
What that means is that the numbers themselves are random but the sequence that they're generated in
is not.
So in order to create more real random numbers we want to see that random number generator with a different
value each time that we create different sequences of values.
So we'll do that in a second.
I'll do it without seeding and with seeding so you can see the difference.
But let's talk about what's going on here.
I need a random number generated right.
So I'm going to create a variable called random number and I'm initializing it to zero.
And then what I want to do is just one of the loop and create 10 random numbers and that's what my count
variable is.
I can make that as whatever I like.
But in this case it's a 10.
And then in this case assuming we're rolling a die.
So I want to return a random number between 1 and 6 inclusive.
So one two three four or five or six.
This can be one to 10.
This could be one in one or two if you're flipping a coin.
This could be anything you like whatever range you like.
This is how you would create that range and I'm just going to create min and max to be one in six you
can modify those to whatever you like to create whatever range you need.
Now the rand if you look at the RAND function and the documentation that says that it returns a random
number between zero and random Max I have no idea what Rand Max is on my system it will probably differ
on your system but it's guaranteed to be at least 3 to 7 6 7.
So I'll run it here and we'll see what we get.
Now this function right here is the one that seeding the random number generator.
Remember we want to see this random number generator with a different number every time that we run
this program.
So what better way to see them with the system time.
And that's what's going on right here.
I'm seeing the random number generator too.
I'm calling the time function and passing in a null pointer which is zero.
This line of code right here you can see an example of that in the docs that I showed you earlier it
shows you exactly how to seed the random number generator.
So now we've seeded the random number generator.
And what we want to do is we want to generate 10 random numbers.
So I'm going to start from I was 1 while I less Center equal to count so I'm going from 1 to 10 by 1
here's my increment.
And then each iteration of the loop I'm going to call Rand.
Rand returns the number between 0 and 3 2 7 6 7 or higher in this case.
I have no idea what Rand Max is on my system.
We'll see in a minute.
I need to really scale that number down because I only want numbers between 1 and 6.
So if I take Rand and I take the modulus of it based on max right.
So take Rand.
Divide it by 6 and whatever the remainder is I've scaled that number down now.
So in this case if I divide that number by 6 the remainders are they're going to be 0 1 2 3 4 or 5 right.
Those are the only options I have.
But since I want to go 1 to 6 I just add into it and it's as simple as that.
So that's going to give me a number 1 through 6 inclusive and I'm going to output it.
So let's run this program and see how it runs here build and run and ran max on my system is 3 2 7 6
7.
So now we know what it is.
And here you can see that I'm generating 10 random numbers 1 through 6 I'm getting 2 2 5 3 1 or 2 and
so forth.
If I run this remember that the first sequence there is two to five.
So let's run this again.
And now I've got four six three is the first three numbers and I'll run this again.
And now I've got two to one and so forth.
If we did not see that random number generator let me comment that line out right here.
I don't see that and run it again.
You can see 6 6 5 5 6.
OK.
We run it again 6 6 5 5 6 so we see the numbers are random but the sequence that we're getting is not
we're always going to get the same sequence of numbers.
Now that could be useful sometimes if you're trying to repeat experiments and so forth but usually you
don't want that.
And that's why we see the random number generator here.
So there you go you see a couple of examples of using some built in functions we use the math library
and we're using the random number generation library and we're using the C standard library to generate
random numbers.
None of us do we really care about how the random number generator works on us.
That's what really interests you and you can dig into the libraries and see exactly what algorithms
they use.
But if I need to create random numbers this is how I do it.
Really easy.